Do you agree? One way of testing the idea is to reverse the terms and make it: "A man can be defeated but not destroyed." Which makes more sense to you?

Whatever sense you make of it, you can tell this theme is at the very heart of The Old Man and the Sea. Try to firm up your understanding and position and be ready to test it out at the end of the story.

Now Santiago regrets having killed the fish. At first this might seem merely more of the same thing we've been hearing: it's a shame life is like this, since the fish is so noble. But this is a different regret. Now he's truly sorry this whole thing happened at all.

Why? For an answer, you might think in terms of the meaning of the fish's death. What gave it meaning before--meaning which is possibly being stripped away along with the actual flesh of the marlin?

Santiago lashes his knife to one of the oars because he's lost his harpoon and its rope in killing the mako shark. Now at least he's armed, even though it may be a futile weapon in terms of making it safely back to the Havana harbor with the rest of the marlin intact. But because a fresh breeze has come up and the sailing goes well, "some of his hope" returns and it launches him into a meditation on sin.

The initial springboard is his reflection that it is a sin not to hope. Let's spend some time on this idea.

Objectively, he's right, by the traditional standards of Judeo-Christian theology. Not to hope is to lack trust in the Almighty. But only if the doubt concerns salvation itself, or the power of the Almighty to love and forgive. Santiago isn't doubting that, is he? He's only doubting the possibility of bringing the marlin to shore. Or in this story are they one and the same?

Don't think about sin, he tells himself. It's a silly undertaking because you're not equipped to think about it and you have enough to do without trying to sort out sin.

Yet he thinks about it anyway, particularly that it might have been sinful to kill the fish. Remember his earlier outlook that being a fisherman and therefore killing the marlin was simply what he was born to do. (Things just are what they are.) In that case, does he have no choice but to sin--since he is what he is and what he does is sinful? Does that make some kind of sense with his next thought, "But then everything is a sin"?

He reminds himself again not to think about sin and keeps doing so anyway. Now he questions his motives for killing the fish. Perhaps the taint of sin is there, and he reflects that his motive wasn't just survival--get a fish to get money to get food.

"You killed him for pride and because you are a fisherman." Now there's an outside chance that a particularly strict view of holiness might cite the former as sinful; pride has often been cited as the root of all sin. But being a fisherman? In other words, being what you are--that made it sinful?

There's not much hope for sainthood in this view, is there? Analyze it; compare it with your views. Is the aging Santiago basically in the same class as the young hoodlum with "born to raise hell" tattooed on his shoulder?

Perhaps there's a way out of this sinfulness: he loved the fish, both before and after killing it. Love for the victim might erase the sinfulness of killing it. Or make it worse, he reflects a moment later.

Good, evil, love, hate. They are at the heart of life, aren't they? So it's not surprising, particularly if this story is any kind of an allegory at all, that they're surfacing rather prominently here.

The sharks arrive now, two of them, just as we knew they would. They're not the more respectable mako sharks but galanos--shovel-nosed, scavenger sharks. Cowardly, sneaky and very definitely not noble.

Is this, perhaps, sin? A symbol of sin? On the one hand they're going to ravage the noble marlin, an act which could serve as evidence for their sinfulness. On the other hand, the sharks are simply being what they are; that's a piece of evidence for the other position.

A much referred to paragraph is coming next:

"Ay," he said aloud. There is no translation for this word and perhaps it is just a noise such as a man might make, involuntarily, feeling the nail go through his hands and into the wood.

There's no doubt about that one, is there? Perhaps it's safer to say that there's no doubt about the reference, the crucified Christ.

Does this make Santiago a Christ figure? There will be some further evidence for this view when Santiago finally returns to his shack in the middle of the night. Many people believe the connection is obvious and it's a closed case.

There's a nagging question, though. If Santiago is a Christ, a savior, what on earth is he saving here? Certainly not the marlin. Himself? We'll return to this consideration shortly.

Santiago is able to kill the two galanos with the knife lashed to the butt of the oar, but not before they've done what they came for. A fourth of the great marlin is now gone, and it sends Santiago into another wave of guilt.

"I'm sorry about it, fish. It makes everything wrong."

The obvious question is, What's the "it"? The attack of the galanos? He has little control over that, and they're being what they are.

It's treachery again. Santiago returns to his previous guilt feelings about being treacherous, violating the rules of the game. "I shouldn't have gone out so far, fish."

