The galanos, of course, They did it. At least that's what Santiago is suggesting. He doesn't mention, as he did to himself, that it was "nothing" but his going out too far.

"Now we fish together again." That's Manolin talking. On whose authority will he and Santiago fish together again?

Apparently on his own. He's making a break, coming into his own personhood, and he does so boldly: "The hell with luck... I'll bring the luck with me." As for his family's opinion of this and of his previous parental orders, "I do not care."

Is this the redemption bought by Santiago's (Christ's) suffering--the coming into being of a real person? And, if so, is Manolin the leader now? That's one opinion, although Manolin himself says he will fish with Santiago "...for I still have much to learn."

He's crying again as he leaves Santiago's shack. In contrast to Manolin's tears (he alone has a depth of feeling for what happened) are the remarks of some tourists who view the skeleton of Santiago's brother.

They think it's a shark. In that case, they have good and evil mixed up, don't they? They do not understand the significance of these events. They see only a skeleton. They are ignorant of the magnificence of Santiago's struggle.

Of course, that often happens. Even Santiago isn't certain of what good and evil really are and he's not about to attempt to solve the problem now.

He's dreaming about the lions.

^^^^^^^^^^THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA: GLOSSARY

BITT ?A post on the deck of a boat, usually with a rope attached, used either to secure the boat or to tow it.

BONITO, ALBACORE ?Types of fish of the tuna family.

BOW ?The front end of a boat. (The back is the stern.)

BRINGING A FISH IN TOO GREEN ?Attempting to get a fish into the boat when it has too much life and strength left.

BRISA ?Breeze.

CALAMBRE ?Cramp.

CAST NET ?A usually round, weighted net designed to be thrown downward and then pulled back by strings. Used for catching small bait fish.

DENTUSO ?Having big teeth, "toothy"; a sort of nickname Santiago uses for the shark.

DORADO ?Golden.

ESPUELA DE HUESO ?A bone spur.

FATHOM ?Six feet. Thus, Santiago's baits range from 240 to 750 feet deep.

FLYING FISH ?A fish with a long pectoral fin which can look like a wing. After getting up a burst of speed, the fish can leave the water and move through the air for several feet.

GAFF ?A large, sharp hook at the end of a rod or pole, used to help pull a large fish from the water.

HARPOON ?A barbed spear with a rope attached.

HAWK-BILLS ?A deep-sea turtle; their shells are brown mottled with yellow and are quite valuable. Usually spelled hawksbill.

JUEGO ?Game or sport.

