And this time it's a gift from two sources: Manolin and Martin, the owner of the Ten-ace, who apparently has done this before.

Remember that we'll shortly see Santiago in heroic terms, gallantly waging an almost superhuman battle. But here he's a very ordinary person who needs and is supported by other people.

Like Santiago, most--perhaps all--of us are fragile and dependent at times, even though at others we act with great individuality and apparent independence. We can wonder who were the Manolins and the Martins behind some of the great heroes of history; and who are the anonymous people supporting the heroes of today's headlines.

Without the supper Manolin brought from Martin, Santiago might not have had the strength for his coming three-day battle. Was there someone who, by some small act, helped George Washington find the courage to lead a ragged attack force across the Delaware? Did someone give an unrecorded word of encouragement that led to Abraham Lincoln's writing the Emancipation Proclamation?

Each of us might ask who were the perhaps forgotten supporters behind our own moments of "doing what had to be done."

The conversation as the two eat supper seems principally about baseball, but it leads up to key ideas.

One is the lions on the beaches of Africa. Santiago really has seen lions on an African beach in his youth, and now they're a recurrent part of his dreams. (More on this shortly.) It's significant that the boy does not want to hear about them again, As close as they are, Manolin and Santiago do not share everything, as youth and age cannot.

Another key idea is the boy's comment, "There are many good fishermen and some great ones. But there is only you." After you've finished the story, you might want to analyze Manolin's comment critically. Is Santiago so unique, so larger-than-life that he doesn't and can't represent the rest of us "ordinary" human beings? Or is this simply the hero worship of a boy speaking to his idol--somewhat as Santiago himself speaks of "the great DiMaggio"?

The boy leaves and Santiago sleeps. Then come the lions, Santiago's recurrent dream.

NOTE: THE LIONS ON THE BEACH ?If you had a recurring dream and mentioned it to a half dozen experts, you'd probably get a half dozen different interpretations. And you might meet someone who concludes, "Who knows what it means? You'll have to decide that for yourself."

That's what you'll find if you investigate different critical interpretations of Santiago's dream lions, and even of the beach they play on and the fact that the beach is almost blindingly white. Many experts sound rather sure of what the lions represent. And some say that it's pointless to try to deduce a specific, symbolic meaning.

Here are some of the suggested possibilities. The lions could simply be a reminder of Santiago's youthful days when he too was in the prime of strength. Or they may represent his admiration for nobility of deeds, since a lion is often characterized as "the king of beasts."

And yet Hemingway says Santiago's lions "played like young cats in the dusk." So it's possible to see the lions as symbolizing the great, often violent forces of life somehow tamed, in some ideal but probably impossible world.

That's one you can have fun working on if you like: what or who are Santiago's dream lions? And if you come up with something that you can't find in official opinions but can defend with believable reasons, Hemingway would probably be proud of you.

^^^^^^^^^^THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA: MORNING

This is the last scene in which we'll see Manolin until the very end of the story, and it reinforces some things we know about their relationship: it's a very masculine relationship between partners who know each other well, yet at the same time it's gentle and caring.

Santiago simply takes hold of Manolin's foot, "gently," until the boy awakes. Once awake, even though sleepy, the boy goes about doing what has to be done.

They are not alike, these two partners walking barefoot through the early morning dark, but they reach toward an understanding of the other. Santiago apologizes for rousing the boy so early; there is real tenderness and affection coming from him here. The boy on his part accepts what must be. "Qui va." ("That's the way it goes.") And he adds, "It is what a man must do." He's accepting a "man's" life, which Santiago has been teaching him, even if he can't fully live it yet.

This maturity from Manolin is perhaps due to having had a good teacher. In many ways Santiago has treated him as an equal, trusting him, giving him challenges. It's significant that Manolin's new employer doesn't even let him carry the fishing gear, Santiago was different. "I let you carry things when you were five years old."

You might stop for a moment and think of who you consider to have been your best teachers. Were they like Santiago in some ways? Were they good because they challenged you, expected you to perform--and yet did so almost gently at times? That seems to have been Santiago's "teaching technique."

Another mark of a good teacher is the ability to teach not just a subject (English, math, Spanish, or fishing) but to teach life along with the subject. Santiago has apparently done that just by being himself. Perhaps you've had some teachers like that.

^^^^^^^^^^THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA: THE JOURNEY OUT

If you've ever gone fishing very early in the morning, you'll identify with the scene where Santiago sets out from the Havana harbor. If you haven't, and if you read it slowly and carefully, you'll get a good sense of "being there." Again, Hemingway's language is, as usual, extremely simple; there's no lush overload of descriptive words. Simple phrases like "the dip and push of their oars" get the job done.

This is sometimes called "the theater of the mind," a phrase often applied to radio dramas, where the listeners create the scene in their own minds from a few, well-chosen details.

Notice how many sensory details are here. All are stated with the barest of language and often left to the theater of your mind--phrases like "the smell of the land" and "the clean early morning smell of the ocean" and the "trembling sound" as the flying fish leave the water.

